packages/create-package-starter/README.md, before:

# @i-santos/create-package-starter

Scaffold and standardize npm packages with a Changesets-first release workflow.

## Install / Run

```bash
npx @i-santos/create-package-starter --name hello-package
npx @i-santos/create-package-starter --name @i-santos/swarm --default-branch main
npx @i-santos/create-package-starter init --dir ./existing-package
npx @i-santos/create-package-starter init --dir . --with-github --with-beta --with-npm --yes
npx @i-santos/create-package-starter setup-github --repo i-santos/firestack --dry-run
npx @i-santos/create-package-starter setup-beta --dir . --beta-branch release/beta
npx @i-santos/create-package-starter promote-stable --dir . --type patch --summary "Promote beta to stable"
npx @i-santos/create-package-starter setup-npm --dir ./existing-package --publish-first
```

## Commands

Create new package:

- `--name <name>` (required, supports `pkg` and `@scope/pkg`)
- `--out <directory>` (default: current directory)
- `--default-branch <branch>` (default: `main`)

Bootstrap existing package:

- `init`
- `--dir <directory>` (default: current directory)
- `--force` (overwrite managed files/script keys/dependency versions)
- `--cleanup-legacy-release` (remove `release:beta*`, `release:stable*`, `release:promote*`, `release:rollback*`, `release:dist-tags`)
- `--scope <scope>` (optional placeholder helper for docs/templates)
- `--default-branch <branch>` (default: `main`)
- `--beta-branch <branch>` (default: `release/beta`)
- `--with-github` (run GitHub setup in same flow)
- `--with-npm` (run npm setup in same flow)
- `--with-beta` (run beta flow setup; implies `--with-github`)
- `--repo <owner/repo>` (optional; inferred from `remote.origin.url` when omitted)
- `--ruleset <path>` (optional JSON override for main ruleset payload)
- `--dry-run` (preview planned operations without mutating)
- `--yes` (skip confirmation prompts)

Configure GitHub repository settings:

- `setup-github`
- `--repo <owner/repo>` (optional; inferred from `remote.origin.url` when omitted)
- `--default-branch <branch>` (default: `main`)
- `--ruleset <path>` (optional JSON override)
- `--dry-run` (prints intended operations only)

Bootstrap beta release flow:

- `setup-beta`
- `--dir <directory>` (default: current directory)
- `--beta-branch <branch>` (default: `release/beta`)
- `--default-branch <branch>` (default: `main`)
- `--repo <owner/repo>` (optional; inferred from `remote.origin.url` when omitted)
- `--force` (overwrite managed scripts/workflow)
- `--dry-run` (prints intended operations only)
- `--yes` (skip interactive confirmations)

Prepare stable promotion from beta track:

- `promote-stable`
- `--dir <directory>` (default: current directory)
- `--type <patch|minor|major>` (default: `patch`)
- `--summary <text>` (default: `Promote beta track to stable release.`)
- `--dry-run` (prints intended operations only)

Bootstrap npm publishing:

- `setup-npm`
- `--dir <directory>` (default: current directory)
- `--publish-first` (run `npm publish --access public` only when package is not found on npm)
- `--dry-run` (prints intended operations only)

## Managed Standards

The generated and managed baseline includes:

- `package.json` scripts: `check`, `changeset`, `version-packages`, `release`
- `@changesets/cli` in `devDependencies`
- `.changeset/config.json`
- `.changeset/README.md`
- `.github/workflows/ci.yml`
- `.github/workflows/release.yml`
- `.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md`
- `.github/CODEOWNERS`
- `CONTRIBUTING.md`
- `README.md`
- `.gitignore`

## Init Behavior

- Default mode is safe-merge: existing managed files and keys are preserved.
- `--force` overwrites managed files and managed script/dependency keys.
- Existing custom `check` script is preserved unless `--force`.
- Existing `@changesets/cli` version is preserved unless `--force`.
- Lowercase `.github/pull_request_template.md` is recognized as an existing equivalent template.
- If no `--with-*` flags are provided:
  - TTY: asks interactively which external setup to run (`github`, `npm`, `beta`).
  - non-TTY: runs local init only and prints warning with next steps.
- Integrated mode (`--with-github/--with-npm/--with-beta`) pre-validates everything first (gh auth, npm auth, repo/branch/ruleset/package checks) and fails fast before local mutations if validation fails.
- Integrated mode asks confirmation for sensitive external operations and ruleset/branch adoption conflicts (unless `--yes`).

## Output Summary Contract

All commands print a deterministic summary with:

- files created
- files overwritten
- files skipped
- scripts updated/skipped/removed
- dependencies updated/skipped
- warnings

## setup-github Behavior

`setup-github` applies repository defaults via `gh` API:

- default branch
- delete branch on merge
- auto-merge enabled
- squash-only merge policy
- set Actions workflow default permissions to `write` (with PR review approvals enabled for workflows)
- create/update branch ruleset with required PR, 0 approvals by default, stale review dismissal, resolved conversations, and deletion/force-push protection

If `gh` is missing or unauthenticated, command exits non-zero with actionable guidance.

## setup-beta Behavior

`setup-beta` configures prerelease automation:

- adds beta scripts to `package.json`
- creates/preserves `.github/workflows/release.yml` with beta+stable branch triggers
- creates/preserves `.github/workflows/ci.yml` with beta+stable branch triggers
- ensures `release/beta` branch exists remotely (created from default branch if missing)
- applies beta branch protection ruleset on GitHub (including required CI matrix checks for Node 18 and 20)
- applies beta branch protection ruleset on GitHub with stable required check context (`required-check`)
- asks for confirmation before mutating repository settings and again before overwriting existing beta ruleset
- supports safe-merge by default and `--force` overwrite
- supports configurable beta branch (`release/beta` by default)

## promote-stable Behavior

`promote-stable` prepares stable promotion from prerelease mode:

- validates `.changeset/pre.json` exists
- runs `changeset pre exit`
- creates a promotion changeset (`patch|minor|major`)
- prints next step guidance for opening beta->main PR

## setup-npm Behavior

`setup-npm` validates npm publish readiness:

- checks npm CLI availability
- checks npm authentication (`npm whoami`)
- checks whether package already exists on npm
- optionally performs first publish (`--publish-first`)
- prints next steps for Trusted Publisher configuration

Important: Trusted Publisher still needs manual setup in npm package settings.

When npm setup runs inside orchestrated `init --with-npm`, first publish is automatic when package is not found on npm.

## Trusted Publishing Note

If package does not exist on npm yet, first publish may be manual:

```bash
npm publish --access public
```

After first publish, configure npm Trusted Publisher using your owner, repository, workflow file (`.github/workflows/release.yml`), and branch (`main` by default).

Commit message:

docs(create-package-starter): document init merge-safe refinements

packages/create-package-starter/README.md, after:

# @i-santos/create-package-starter

Scaffold and standardize npm packages with a Changesets-first release workflow.

## Install / Run

```bash
npx @i-santos/create-package-starter --name hello-package
npx @i-santos/create-package-starter --name @i-santos/swarm --default-branch main
npx @i-santos/create-package-starter init --dir ./existing-package
npx @i-santos/create-package-starter init --dir . --with-github --with-beta --with-npm --yes
npx @i-santos/create-package-starter setup-github --repo i-santos/firestack --dry-run
npx @i-santos/create-package-starter setup-beta --dir . --beta-branch release/beta
npx @i-santos/create-package-starter promote-stable --dir . --type patch --summary "Promote beta to stable"
npx @i-santos/create-package-starter setup-npm --dir ./existing-package --publish-first
```

## Commands

Create new package:

- `--name <name>` (required, supports `pkg` and `@scope/pkg`)
- `--out <directory>` (default: current directory)
- `--default-branch <branch>` (default: `main`)

Bootstrap existing package:

- `init`
- `--dir <directory>` (default: current directory)
- `--force` (overwrite managed files/script keys/dependency versions)
- `--cleanup-legacy-release` (remove `release:beta*`, `release:stable*`, `release:promote*`, `release:rollback*`, `release:dist-tags`)
- `--scope <scope>` (optional placeholder helper for docs/templates)
- `--default-branch <branch>` (default: `main`)
- `--beta-branch <branch>` (default: `release/beta`)
- `--with-github` (run GitHub setup in same flow)
- `--with-npm` (run npm setup in same flow)
- `--with-beta` (run beta flow setup; implies `--with-github`)
- `--repo <owner/repo>` (optional; inferred from `remote.origin.url` when omitted)
- `--ruleset <path>` (optional JSON override for main ruleset payload)
- `--dry-run` (preview planned operations without mutating)
- `--yes` (skip confirmation prompts)

Configure GitHub repository settings:

- `setup-github`
- `--repo <owner/repo>` (optional; inferred from `remote.origin.url` when omitted)
- `--default-branch <branch>` (default: `main`)
- `--ruleset <path>` (optional JSON override)
- `--dry-run` (prints intended operations only)

Bootstrap beta release flow:

- `setup-beta`
- `--dir <directory>` (default: current directory)
- `--beta-branch <branch>` (default: `release/beta`)
- `--default-branch <branch>` (default: `main`)
- `--repo <owner/repo>` (optional; inferred from `remote.origin.url` when omitted)
- `--force` (overwrite managed scripts/workflow)
- `--dry-run` (prints intended operations only)
- `--yes` (skip interactive confirmations)

Prepare stable promotion from beta track:

- `promote-stable`
- `--dir <directory>` (default: current directory)
- `--type <patch|minor|major>` (default: `patch`)
- `--summary <text>` (default: `Promote beta track to stable release.`)
- `--dry-run` (prints intended operations only)

Bootstrap npm publishing:

- `setup-npm`
- `--dir <directory>` (default: current directory)
- `--publish-first` (run `npm publish --access public` only when package is not found on npm)
- `--dry-run` (prints intended operations only)

## Managed Standards

The generated and managed baseline includes:

- `package.json` scripts: `check`, `changeset`, `version-packages`, `release`
- `@changesets/cli` in `devDependencies`
- `.changeset/config.json`
- `.changeset/README.md`
- `.github/workflows/ci.yml`
- `.github/workflows/release.yml`
- `.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE.md`
- `.github/CODEOWNERS`
- `CONTRIBUTING.md`
- `README.md`
- `.gitignore`

## Init Behavior

- Default mode is safe-merge: existing managed files and keys are preserved.
- `--force` overwrites managed files and managed script/dependency keys.
- `README.md` and `CONTRIBUTING.md` are create-only in `init` (never overwritten).
- Existing `.gitignore` is merged by appending missing template entries.
- Existing custom `check` script is preserved unless `--force`.
- Existing `@changesets/cli` version is preserved unless `--force`.
- Lowercase `.github/pull_request_template.md` is recognized as an existing equivalent template.
- `npm install` runs at the end of `init` (or is previewed in `--dry-run`).
- If no `--with-*` flags are provided:
  - TTY: asks interactively which external setup to run (`github`, `npm`, `beta`).
  - non-TTY: runs local init only and prints warning with next steps.
- Integrated mode (`--with-github/--with-npm/--with-beta`) pre-validates everything first (gh auth, npm auth, repo/branch/ruleset/package checks) and fails fast before local mutations if validation fails.
- Integrated mode asks confirmation for sensitive external operations and ruleset/branch adoption conflicts (unless `--yes`).

## Output Summary Contract

All commands print a deterministic summary with:

- files created
- files overwritten
- files skipped
- scripts updated/skipped/removed
- dependencies updated/skipped
- warnings

## setup-github Behavior

`setup-github` applies repository defaults via `gh` API:

- default branch
- delete branch on merge
- auto-merge enabled
- squash-only merge policy
- set Actions workflow default permissions to `write` (with PR review approvals enabled for workflows)
- create/update branch ruleset with required PR, 0 approvals by default, stale review dismissal, resolved conversations, and deletion/force-push protection

If `gh` is missing or unauthenticated, command exits non-zero with actionable guidance.

## setup-beta Behavior

`setup-beta` configures prerelease automation:

- adds beta scripts to `package.json`
- creates/preserves `.github/workflows/release.yml` with beta+stable branch triggers
- creates/preserves `.github/workflows/ci.yml` with beta+stable branch triggers
- ensures `release/beta` branch exists remotely (created from default branch if missing)
- applies beta branch protection ruleset on GitHub (including required CI matrix checks for Node 18 and 20)
- applies beta branch protection ruleset on GitHub with stable required check context (`required-check`)
- asks for confirmation before mutating repository settings and again before overwriting existing beta ruleset
- supports safe-merge by default and `--force` overwrite
- supports configurable beta branch (`release/beta` by default)

## promote-stable Behavior

`promote-stable` prepares stable promotion from prerelease mode:

- validates `.changeset/pre.json` exists
- runs `changeset pre exit`
- creates a promotion changeset (`patch|minor|major`)
- prints next step guidance for opening beta->main PR

## setup-npm Behavior

`setup-npm` validates npm publish readiness:

- checks npm CLI availability
- checks npm authentication (`npm whoami`)
- checks whether package already exists on npm
- optionally performs first publish (`--publish-first`)
- prints next steps for Trusted Publisher configuration

Important: Trusted Publisher still needs manual setup in npm package settings.

When npm setup runs inside orchestrated `init --with-npm`, first publish is automatic when package is not found on npm.

## Trusted Publishing Note

If package does not exist on npm yet, first publish may be manual:

```bash
npm publish --access public
```

After first publish, configure npm Trusted Publisher using your owner, repository, workflow file (`.github/workflows/release.yml`), and branch (`main` by default).
